federalist number 10 the same subject
continued
the union as a safeguard against
domestic faction and insurrection
from the new york packet friday november
23rd
1787 madison
to the people of the state of new york
among the numerous advantages promised
by a well-constructed union
none deserves to be more accurately
developed than its tendency to break and
control the violence of faction
the friend of popular governments never
finds himself so much alarmed for their
character and fate as when he
contemplates their propensity to this
dangerous vice
he will not fail therefore to set a due
value on any plan which without
violating the principles to which he is
attached
provides a proper cure for the
instability injustice and confusion
introduced into the public councils have
in truth
been the mortal diseases under which
popular governments have everywhere
perished
as they continue to be the favorite and
fruitful topics from which the
adversaries to liberty derive their most
specious declarations
the valuable improvements made by the
american constitutions on the popular
models both ancient and modern cannot
certainly be too much admired but it
would be an unwarranted partiality to
contend that they
have as effectually obviated the danger
on this side
as was wished and expected complaints
are everywhere heard from our most
considerate and virtuous citizens
equally the friends of public and
private faith and of public and personal
liberty
that our governments are too unstable
that the public good is disregarded in
the conflicts of rival parties
and that measures are too often decided
not according to the rules of justice in
the rights of the minor party
but by the superior force of an
interested in overbearing majority
however anxiously we may wish that these
complaints had no foundation
the evidence of known facts will not
permit us to deny that they are in some
degree true
it will be found indeed on a candid
review of our situation
that some of the distresses under which
we labor have been erroneously charged
on the operation of our governments
but it will be found at the same time
that other causes will not alone account
for many of our heaviest misfortunes
and particularly for that prevailing and
increasing distrust of public
engagements
and alarm for private rights which are
echoed from one end of the continent to
the other
these must be chiefly if not holy
effects of the unsteadiness and
injustice with which
a factious spirit has tainted our public
administrations
by a faction i understand a number of
citizens whether amounting to a majority
or a minority of the whole who are
united and actuated by some common
impulse of passion or of interest
adversed to the rights of other citizens
or to the permanent and aggregate
interests of the community there are two
methods of curing the mischiefs of
faction
the one by removing its causes the other
by controlling its effects
there are again two methods of removing
the causes of faction
the one by destroying the liberty which
is essential to its existence
the other by giving to every citizen the
same opinions the same passions
and the same interests it could never be
more truly said than of the first remedy
that it was worse than the disease
liberty is to faction what air is to
fire an ailment without which it
instantly expires
but it could not be less folly to
abolish liberty which is essential to
political life
because it nourishes faction than it
would be to wish the annihilation of air
which is essential to animal life
because it imparts to fire its
destructive agency
the second expedient is as impracticable
as the first would be unwise
as long as the reason of man continues
fallible and he is at liberty to
exercise
it different opinions will be formed as
long as the connection subsists between
his reason and his self-love
his opinions and his passions will have
a reciprocal influence on each other
and the former will be objects to which
the latter will attach themselves
the diversity in the faculties of men
from which the rights of property
originate
is not less an insuperable obstacle to a
uniformity of interests
the protection of these faculties is the
first object of government
from the protection of different and
unequal faculties of acquiring property
the possession of different degrees and
kinds of property immediately results
and from the influence of these on the
sentiments and views of the respective
proprietors ensues a division of the
society into different interests and
parties
the latent causes of faction are thus
sown in the nature of man
and we see them everywhere brought into
different degrees of activity according
to the different circumstances of civil
society
a zeal for different opinions concerning
religion concerning government
and many other points as well of
speculation as of practice
an attachment to different leaders
ambitiously contending for preeminence
and power
or to persons of other descriptions
whose fortunes have been interesting to
the human passions have
in turn divided mankind into parties
inflamed them with mutual animosity
and rendered them much more disposed of
vex and oppress each other
than to cooperate for their common good
so strong is this propensity of mankind
fallen to mutual animosities that where
no substantial occasion presents itself
the most frivolous and fanciful
distinctions have been sufficient to
kindle their unfriendly passions
and excite their most violent conflicts
but the most
common and durable source of factions
has been the various
and unequal distribution of property
those who hold and those who are without
property have ever formed distinct
interests in society
those who are creditors and those who
are debtors fall under a like
discrimination
a landed interest a manufacturing
interest a mercantile interest
a moneyed interest with many lesser
interests grow up of necessity in
civilized nations
and divide them into different classes
actuated by different sentiments and
views
the regulation of these various and
interfering interests
forms the principal task of modern
legislation and involves the spirit of
party and faction in the necessary and
ordinary operations of the government
no man is allowed to be a judge in his
own cause because his interest
would certainly bias his judgment and
not improbably corrupt his integrity
with equal nay with greater reason a
body of men are unfit to be both judges
and parties at the same time
yet what are many of the most important
acts of legislation but so many judicial
determinations
not indeed concerning the rights of
single persons but concerning the rights
of large bodies of citizens
and what are the different classes of
legislators but advocates and parties to
the causes which they determine
is a law proposed concerning private
debts it is a question to which the
creditors are parties on one side and
the debtors on the other
justice ought to hold the balance
between them yet the parties are and
must be
themselves the judges and the most
numerous party or in other words the
most
powerful faction must be expected to
prevail
shall domestic manufacturers be
encouraged and in what degree by
restrictions on foreign manufacturers
are questions which would be differently
decided by the landed in the
manufacturing classes
and probably by neither with the sole
regard to justice and the public good
the apportionment of taxes on the
various descriptions of property
is an act which seems to require the
most exact impartiality
yet there is perhaps no legislative act
in which greater opportunity and
temptation are given to a predominant
party to trample on the rules of justice
every shilling with which they
overburden the inferior number
is a shilling save to their own pockets
it is vain to say that enlightened
statement will be able to adjust these
clashing interests
and render them all subservient to the
public good enlightened statesmen will
not always be at the helm
nor in many cases can such an adjustment
be made at all without taking into view
indirect and remote considerations which
will rarely prevail over the immediate
interest which one party may find in
disregarding the rights of another or
the good of the whole
the inference to which we are brought is
that the causes of faction cannot be
removed
and that relief is only to be sought in
the means of controlling its effects
if a faction consists of less than a
majority relief is supplied by the
republican principle which enables the
majority to defeat its sinister views by
regular vote
it may clog the administration it may
convulse the society but it will be
unable to execute and mask its violence
under the forms of the constitution
when a majority is included in a faction
the form of popular government on the
other hand
enables it to sacrifice to its ruling
passion or interests
both the public good and the rights of
other citizens
to secure the public good and private
rights against the danger of such
faction and at the same time to preserve
the spirit in the form of popular
government is then the great object to
which our inquiries are directed
let me add that it is the greatest
iteratum by which this form of
government can be rescued from the
approprium under which it is so long
labored and be recommended to the esteem
and adoption of mankind
by what means is this object attainable
evidently by one or two only
either the existence of the same passion
or interest in a majority at the same
time must be prevented
or the majority having such coexistent
passion or interest
must be rendered by their number and
local situation unable to concert and
carry into effect schemes of oppression
if the impulse and opportunity be
suffered to coincide
we well know that neither moral nor
religious motives can be relied on
as an adequate control they are not
found to be such on the injustice and
violence of individuals
and lose their efficacy in proportion to
the number combined together
that is in proportion as their efficacy
becomes needful
from this view of the subject it may be
concluded that a pure democracy by which
i mean
a society consisting of a small number
of citizens who assemble and administer
the government in person
can admit of no cure for the mischiefs
of faction a common passion for
interests will
in almost every case be felt by a
majority of the whole
a communication in concert result from
the form of government itself
and there is nothing to check the
inducements to sacrifice the weaker
party or an obnoxious individual
hence it is that such democracies have
ever been spectacles of turbulence and
contention
have ever been found incompatible with
personal security or the rights of
property and have in general been as
short in their lives as they have been
violent in their deaths
theoretical politicians who have
patronized the species of government
have erroneously supposed that by
reducing mankind to a perfect equality
in their political rights
they would at the same time be perfectly
equalized and assimilated in their
possessions
their opinions and their passions
a republic by which i mean a government
in which the scheme of representation
takes place
opens a different prospect and promises
the cure for which we are seeking
let us examine the points in which it
varies from pure democracy and we shall
comprehend both the nature of the cure
and the efficacy which it must derive
from the union
the two great points of difference
between a democracy and a republic
are first the delegation of the
government in the latter to a small
number of citizens elected by the rest
secondly the greater number of citizens
the greater sphere of the country over
which the latter may be extended
the effect of the first difference is on
the one hand to refine and enlarge the
public views by passing them through the
medium of a chosen body of citizens
whose wisdom may best discern the true
interest of their
country and whose patriotism and love of
justice will be least likely to
sacrifice it to temporary or partial
considerations
under such a regulation it may well
happen that the public voice
pronounced by the representatives of the
people will be more consonant to the
public
good than if pronounced by the people
themselves convened for that purpose
on the other hand the effect may be
inverted men of fractious tempers of
local prejudices
or of sinister designs may by intrigue
by corruption or by other means first
obtain the suffrages and then betray the
interests of the people
the question resulting is whether small
or extensive republics
are more favorable to the election of
proper guardians of the public wheel
and it is clearly decided in favor of
the latter by two obvious considerations
in the first place it is to be remarked
that however small the republics may be
the representatives must be raised to a
certain number in order to guard against
the cabals of a few
and that however large it may be they
must be limited to a certain number in
order to guard against the confusion of
a multitude hence the number of
representatives in the two cases
not being in proportion to that of the
two constituents and being
proportionally greater in the small
republic
it follows that if the proportion of fit
characters be not less in the large
than in the small republic the former
will present a greater option
and consequently a greater probability
of a fit choice
in the next place as each representative
will be chosen by a greater number of
citizens in the large than
in the small republic it will be more
difficult for unworthy candidates to
practice with success the vicious arts
by which elections are too often carried
and the suffrages of the people being
more free will be more likely to center
in men who possess the most
attractive merit and the most effusive
and established characters
it must be confessed that in this as in
most other cases
there is a mean on both sides of which
inconveniences will be found to lie
by enlarging too much the number of
electors you render the representatives
too little acquainted with all their
local circumstances and lesser interests
as by reducing it too much you render
him unduly attached to these
and too little fit to comprehend and
pursue great and national objects
the federal constitution forms a happy
combination in this respect
the great and aggregate interests being
referred to the national
the local and particular to the state
legislatures
the other point of difference is the
greater number of citizens and extent of
territory which may be brought within
the compass of a republican than of
democratic government
and it is this circumstance principally
which renders factious combinations less
to be dreaded in the former than in the
latter
the smaller the society the fewer
probably will be the distinct parties
and interests composing it
the fewer the distinct parties and
interests the more frequently will a
majority be found of the same party
and the smaller the number of
individuals composing a majority and the
smaller the compass within which they
are placed
the more easily will they concert and
execute their plans for oppression
extend the sphere and you take in
greater variety of parties and interests
you make it less probable that a
majority of the whole will have a common
motive to invade the rights of other
citizens
or if such a common motive exists it
will be more difficult for all who feel
it to discover their own strength
and to act in unison with each other
besides other impediments
it may be remarked that where there is a
consciousness of unjust or dishonorable
purposes
communication is always checked by
distrust in proportion to the number
whose concurrence is necessary
hence it clearly appears that the same
advantage which a republic has over a
democracy
in controlling the effects of faction is
enjoyed by a large over a small republic
is enjoyed by the union over the states
composing it
does the advantage consist in the
substitution of representatives whose
enlightened views and
virtuous sentiments render them superior
to local prejudices and schemes of
injustice
it will not be denied that the
representation of the union will be most
likely to possess these requisite
endowments
does it consist in the greater security
afforded by a greater variety of parties
against the event of any one party being
able to outnumber and oppress the rest
in an equal degree does the increased
variety of parties comprised within the
union
increase this security does it in fine
consist in the greater obstacles opposed
to the concert and accomplishment of the
secret wishes of an unjust and
interested majority
here again the extent of the union gives
it the most palpable advantage
the influence of factious leaders may
kindle aflame within their particular
states but will be unable to spread a
general conflagration through the other
states
a religious sect may degenerate into a
political faction in a part of the
confederacy
but the variety of sex dispersed over
the entire face of it must secure the
national councils against any danger
from that source
a rage for paper money for an abolition
of debts for an equal division of
property or for any other improper or
wicked project
will be less apt to pervade the whole
body of the union than a particular
member of it
in the same proportion as such a malady
is more likely to taint a particular
county or district than an entire state
in the extent and proper structure of
the union therefore
we behold a republican remedy for the
diseases most incident to republican
government
and accordance to the degree of pleasure
and pride we feel in being republicans
ought to be our zeal in cherishing the
spirit and supporting the character of
federalists
publius